[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The point has been updated.
Please check it on the map.
[DRONE BUZZING]
>> Yeah, old people always say,
the land don't belong to us.
We belong to the land.
I want to share this way of
thinking with you because I
think it might help you
understand our connection.
I want to tell you a story about
why the country means so much
to us blackfellas and why
it should mean something
to you too.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS SCREECHING]
My name is Tyson Mowarin.
I'm a Ngarluma man from
Roebourne in the Pilbara
of Western Australia.
I live here in Roebourne
Town, [NON-ENGLISH]..
That's the primary school there.
There's where my daughter,
Sharliya, goes to.
She just walks around the
corner from home every day.
Going to ride the bike,
or are you going to walk?
It's just been me and Sharliya
at home for a while now.
She helps me with my
filmmaking sometimes.
But she doesn't really
like being on camera.
Go in.
>> Welcome, everyone.
>> Welcome, Mr. [INAUDIBLE].
>> Oh, I love it.
It's getting to be--
>> Sharliya doesn't know it
yet, but she's about to win
an award.
>> And that is for
Sharliya Marwarin.
[APPLAUSE]
She's always been out
there with her helmet
on and doing the right
thing on the roads.
So it's really good to see.
>> I'm really proud of my girl.
Like any other
aboriginal girl, Sharliya
was born with the responsibility
to look after country.
It's part of our identity.
And I'm making sure
she's strong on that.
She loves the country
just as much as I do.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
That was just a greeting in
Ngarluma and [INAUDIBLE],,
meeting and greeting the
permanent water places.
It's very important for us.
Kids can go fishing now.
>> As Aboriginal people, we
still believe and we feel
and we know that the spirit
of the land is still alive.
She's still out there.
The country is living
and breathing still.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Connection to country,
[NON-ENGLISH],, is many things.
It comes in many forms.
It's physical.
It's spiritual.
It's where you and your
family are connected to.
That's part of our identity.
[BIRDSONG]
When I was young, my
grandmother, Maisy,
told me about some of the
stories her dad told her.
He was born in 1896
near Roebourne.
He was a Ngarluma man.
One story my great-grandfather
told was how all
the [NON-ENGLISH],,
creation spirits,
were out there on the Burrup.
He told her that it
was a sacred place
and that she should
avoid it at all times.
>> With all them things,
their paintings and that.
>> Hmm.
>> What did he say?
>> He said they were-- he said
nobody should go around there,
a sacred part.
>> Some petroglyphs
are men-only sites.
Some are women-only sites.
So we can't show you those.
But it's OK to visit
the animal petroglyphs.
Our elders teach us to be
careful of each of them.
Just because they
are there in the open
doesn't mean you can go
and do as you please.
>> (SHOUTING)
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Welcome to Murujuga country.
You are now walking on footsteps
of my ancestors, carvings
that are here.
Last count was over a
million and still counting.
>> The old people who walked
this land left these carvings
for us, left these stories
to teach us about food,
to show us where the water
is, and tell us what to hunt.
It's like a map to guide us.
My people were
telling their stories,
producing rock art on Murujuga
long before the pyramids were
built. One person who knows
about the Burrup rock art
is West Australian
Senator, Robin Chapple.
He's been campaigning
about it for many years.
>> If there were eight
wonders of the world--
we took about seven--
this would be the eighth.
It would be the best World
Heritage site in the world.
You have art that is at
least 30,000 years old.
You don't have that
anywhere else in the world.
The earliest art anywhere
else in the world is 17,000.
Your art is twice the
age, and it is beautiful.
It is stunning.
Those old archaic faces were
done by people a long time
ago who had more artistic
endeavor than anybody
anywhere else around the
world at the same time.
>> There's many places around
the world that have rock art.
But nobody knows
who created them.
The civilizations that did
create them are long gone.
But we know who created
our ones, [NON-ENGLISH]..
This petroglyph is actually 10
times older than the pyramids.
I don't think anyone would allow
anyone else to destroy or alter
them in any way.
But that didn't stop the
government giving approvals
to build the biggest gas plant
in the Southern Hemisphere,
right here in the
middle of Murujuga.
[EXPLOSION]
>> Woodside would not be
interviewed for this program
but in a written statement
confirmed that "sites
and engravings that could not
be moved were recorded and then
destroyed."
A company spokesperson said
some carvings were probably
used as base for the
plant, i.e. the bedrock.
In this deserted valley
on the Burrup Peninsula,
we've come across
this eerie graveyard
of Aboriginal carvings.
There's around 2,000 of them.
They're all numbered,
and many are
lying face down in the dirt.
It seems like a sad
final resting place
for these works
of art that really
represent life and culture
as it used to be around here.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We live with the country.
We grow with the country.
From a white man's perspective,
all they want to see
is to benefit from the country,
take, take, take, and take,
whereas we'll only
take what we need.
So you got to learn to have a
balance with the [NON-ENGLISH],,
and in return, the country
will look after you.
>> And this was how our people
lived until the squatters
and pearlers arrived, hungry
for land, resources, and labor.
It's been going on around
here since the early days.
My people were used as slaves
on the pearling boats, forced
to dive for pearls for no pay.
If the boat was sold, they were
included as part of the price.
And when they tried to fight
back, they'd be slaughtered.
These standing stones
here at the Burrup
represent the people,
including women and children,
who died in the
Flying Foam Massacre.
Our people came
around afterwards
and stood up these stones
to remember them by.
The government created policies
to deny Aboriginal people
existence.
The assimilation
policy was designed
to breed Aboriginal people out.
>> Those that have been
assimilated into earning good
living or earning wages
amongst the civilized areas,
that have been
accepted into society,
and they have accepted society
and can handle society,
I'd leave them well alone.
The ones that are no good to
themselves, who can't accept
things, they're half caste.
And this is where most
of the troubles come.
I would get the water up so
that they were sterile and would
breed themselves
out in the future,
and that would
solve the problem.
>> Hancock was the person who
started the iron ore mining
in the 1960s.
It's no wonder the
railway line sometimes
went through sacred sites.
In the 1980s, they built
these massive gas plants.
We negotiated an agreement
to build the plant away
from our sacred sites,
but the resource companies
went ahead anyway.
Now it's a fertilizer plant,
with emissions so acidic
they can corrode the rocks.
Do they really want to
destroy what's been here
for over 40,000 years?
It's no wonder there's
a sense of urgency
right across the Pilbara,
right across the state,
because there's a fear from
our old people, our elders,
that our heritage
isn't being respected.
In 2014, the government began
trying to make amendments
to the Aboriginal Heritage
Act so they could fast
track approvals for mining
and resource companies
to destroy sites.
Gregg McIntyre has been
fighting for Aboriginal rights
for many years.
He was the barrister who
with the Aboriginal people
first won land rights.
>> Even if the Aboriginal
Cultural Materials Committee,
under the Aboriginal
Heritage Act,
identifies a site as of
extreme significance,
there's still a power by
the minister of the day
of the state government to
consent to the destruction
of the site.
The very important
Burrup Peninsula
was removed from the
Register of Aboriginal Sites
as a site as a whole.
I understand that there are
some parts of it which still
remain as archeological sites.
But as a heritage unit,
that peninsula was removed.
>> This rock art is our
stories, our commission.
And it's an important
part of our heritage.
But it's constantly
under threat.
>> What we've seen here in the
Pilbara is lots of sites that
we thought were sites.
The bureaucrats in the DIA
have gone through them,
and they've chucked
them out essentially.
And they said,
they're not sites.
That don't meet the criteria.
And the strategy
here, from my point
of view, what I
see is this, it's
all about whittling
down heritage values,
cultural heritage
values on the land,
getting them out
of the way, which
means that developers
and explorers and miners
have an easier path to get
their approvals in place.
>> Rock art is just one
part of our heritage.
We have sacred sites, quarries,
fertility and burial sites.
So why does the government
keep amending our Aboriginal
Heritage Act?
>> The Aboriginal Heritage
Act is really about Aboriginal
heritage being the
heritage of the state.
And in fact, all objects are
said to belong to the state
if they're identified
as Aboriginal objects
under the legislation.
And decisions are
said to be made
in the interests of the
Western Australian community
rather than in the interests
of Aboriginal people.
>> Aboriginal people have been
denied in nearly every aspect
of our lives, starting
229 years ago.
The British government denied
that there were people here,
that there was a culture here.
Now the way the native
title system is designed,
it makes us feel that
we're being denied again
because we have to
prove that we have
got a connection to country.
What more proof do you need?
We haven't come
from anywhere else.
Aboriginal people have been
here from the beginning.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Ricky and his older
brother, Frank, they
are part of that last
generation of people
who grew up on the stations.
They've led a more bush
life, more cultural life
than my generation these days.
They're the last people
who grew up, worked
and lived on the stations
and who are really, truly,
daily connected to the country.
>> We learned from old people,
especially around Ngarluma
country, where we grew up.
We learned from our old
people telling us the places.
>> I love going out in
a country with elders,
seeing the place where
they lived and worked.
It helps me to understand
their spiritual connection
to the country.
>> My name is Reggie Sambo,
and I'm a Ngarluma person.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
I just want to explain a
bit this old place here I've
been as a kid.
I grew up in this place
here with my mom and dad
and my older brother.
We lived here, all of us,
in this place here we call
[NON-ENGLISH].
We was quite happy
out here at times.
And this house here, me and
my older brother put this up.
We didn't get help
from the second boss.
I think he didn't
care about us anyway.
So we manage.
So we can go inside.
Cattle having a
good use of it now.
[LAUGHS]
And that bed there, I
think that used to be mine.
We never had mattress.
We used to use, sometime,
just sheep skins.
We'd put it in the bed.
All the wall things were tied
with wire, no nails or bolts
and just with wire.
But we were quite happy here.
Me and my brother
stayed here for a while.
And we got separated.
Our boss from Pyramid bought
Warrenby Station then.
So they moved me to Warrenby and
my brother to Pyramid Station.
So we went separate ways.
[SNIFFS] But good to see
the old place again, anyway.
They can't go doing other
place in our country,
like mining and
things like that.
I believe that's wrong.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I love going bush and
taking photographs of country
and people.
My mom and dad took a lot of
photos in the younger days.
I think that's how I got
interested in photography
and filmmaking in
the first place.
Remember when you
took one here before,
when you were a little kid?
See that there?
[NON-ENGLISH] Come here.
Stand over here.
Ready?
Show your face.
Smile.
Ready?
Now.
[CAMERA BEEPING]
For the camera.
Ready?
[BEEPING GETS FASTER]
[CAMERA CLICKS]
Beautiful country.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CARS DRIVING]
[DISTANT DOG BARKING]
[INDISTINCT CONVERSATION]
>> These days what I'm trying
to do with making films
and gathering and
documenting knowledge,
I'm trying to gather this
knowledge and share it
and teach.
It's my way of maintaining
our culture and heritage
and our connection to country.
I'm always trying to bring our
ancient culture and heritage
together with modern
technology to not only preserve
it, but use it today too.
I'm working with my mate Stew
on a virtual reality project.
>> Them patterns there, actually
inspired by some of the local
paintings as well.
>> It looks like
[INAUDIBLE] stuff.
>> Yeah, I think
that one is, yeah.
>> [INAUDIBLE]?
>> Yeah, the same week that I
was painting this waterhole,
she was actually painting a
waterhole at the [INAUDIBLE]
Art Center.
So I was like, oh, we must
have our brains in sync.
[LAUGHS]
>> Thinking about
the same country.
>> Yeah.
>> When I'm painting that
country, it gives me peace.
And I tell my story by painting
like this to the children.
And they ask me, what
are you painting, Nana?
I'm painting about the country.
I'm painting about the ocean.
When we go to the ocean, we
go fishing, we look for crabs,
we look for food.
And in the country,
we go and do the same.
There are bush medicines
and plants and--
yeah.
I think that's one
way of us telling
our stories through the canvas.
>> So you can move them
controllers in different ways
to make the country react.
>> It would be good to somehow
harness the power in the storm,
you know?
>> You were saying how some
men will use the boomerangs
in different ways.
>> Make the noise.
Give it all--
[MAKES CLICKING SOUND]
like paper, for the
song, the storm.
>> Is the energy from the
boomerang going into one area
of the environment?
>> Yeah, probably.
Somewhere where you
face the boomerangs.
>> It's like you're shooting
out there energy from
the boomerangs maybe into one
of those willy-willies or--
>> Yeah, you could be
loading it up, shwoo, shwoo.
>> You can hear Patrick's song
being sung at the same time.
So we can make the
audience understand
that the song that
is being sung is also
part of that process of
connecting to the country.
>> Yeah.
[ABORIGINAL SONG BEING SUNG]
Patrick is a Ngarluma
Murujuga, just like me.
He walks in both worlds.
Patrick has worked
for the mining
companies for many years.
But he still takes his
cultural obligations seriously.
>> Some companies
are good like that.
Mining companies,
they'll come and listen,
listen to the Murujuga
people and things
because they're accepting what
their knowledge and information
we get from the
rest of the country.
Then there are other companies
that won't take that advice.
They won't listen.
And they just want to go
and do what they want to do.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The sun.
>> It's a very important
site, that one.
>> Important and dangerous one.
>> We get that thing before
white people come in, from
generation to generation.
And it was still fine.
>> All around the same.
>> We've got to look out for it.
>> But just think where these
cars is there, like that.
What more will it take
if they come along,
grade another road there,
or they put a fence line
boundary through here?
They disturb that site.
That's a danger for all the
people in the country here.
See all these trees
and spinifex and grass,
all down the mooring there?
If that one gets disturbed
in their own way,
it'll turn this
place into a desert.
[OMINOUS MUSIC]
Back in the early
station days, they
used to talk about
all the people
who work in stations and living
on their rations and things,
it was a good time for them
because they felt connected
still to the Murujuga.
But there was times, some
of these white pastoralists
and the station owners,
they might get on the drink.
They start going getting stupid
with the women in the camps
and things.
Well, our people say,
this isn't right.
You all think you're
smart, eh, can boss us
around and this and that?
They look at all
that cattle or sheep
that they used to have there.
We've got a site to
fix you fellows up.
They'll go to that
site, and they'll
work that site under the sun.
It'll make it that hot.
It killed a sheep,
killed all the animals
what's in the station.
All the water start
drying up everywhere.
>> Normally, [INAUDIBLE]
sites are increase sites.
They're used to
promote fertility.
It's a place where
we would go to ask
the spirit of the land,
the spirit of the country,
to bring fertility back to our
country, more fish, more plant
life, more animal life.
It's very much the
same as when farmers go
to a church and pray for rain.
Just like the
[NON-ENGLISH] site,
there are other increase
sites used to provide food.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> This one is Gardangu.
It's like a sweet toffee,
a bush lolli, which
is found on tree branches.
>> It is a very important site.
It's not only for
us Ngarluma people,
because all kind of [INAUDIBLE],,
they all love that stuff.
Well, our people used to
come and start this thing,
grab the dry twigs from that
candy bush, the dry ones.
Put them in the spinifex there.
Grab that rock there.
Big block will start
it, the biggest block,
so the gum can be big.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you show your respect,
the country will always provide
for you.
That's all the spirit of
the country and spirit
of the old people coming
back to be with you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[LAUGHTER]
Somehow, just being out here on
country makes you feel better.
Feels like it heals you.
>> Today, the DIA is
de-registering sites.
What it means for
Aboriginal people
throughout Western
Australia is this.
One day you could wake up,
and that low ground with
[NON-ENGLISH],, with a special
place that's registered
and protected, you could
go to bed that night,
wake up the next
morning, and it's not.
And you wouldn't know it's
not because no one would
have told you.
>> Robin has been helping
us keep track of what's been
happening with our sites.
>> We asked a question
in Parliament,
had any other sites
been removed by stealth?
And the government
admitted they'd
removed another 22 sites.
We continued asking questions.
And then that 22
sites identified
that the liberal
national government
had removed 36 sites.
We continued asking
questions and have recently
discovered that a
further 1,300 sites have
been removed as well.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Knocking off sites does more
than just leave the country
open to greedy developers.
It threatens our very identity.
Our skin system is an important
way of connecting people
to country.
[LAUGHTER]
Your skin name teaches
you many things--
teaches you your
responsibility and also
your expected
behaviors when you're
relating to other people
in your immediate family
and other people
in your community.
So when people are
forcibly removed,
it's not only
physical separation,
it's the severance
of a bond that
determines who we are as
individuals, as family,
as community, and the bond with
the world and everything in it,
including plants and animals.
People have been
forcibly separated
from their families
and traditional lands
since the time of first contact.
It is still happening today.
>> Prime Minister Tony Abbott
has taken a stand against
protesters on Harrison Island by
backing a plan to shut down 150
remote Aboriginal communities.
>> It's not the job of the
taxpayer to subsidize lifestyle
choices.
>> They're living in
these communities not
because they're like a
retired teacher and got a life
and a sea change process.
They're there because it's
the essence of their life.
>> What is it Tony
Abbott doesn't get about
the well-documented connection
that Australia's first citizens
have between them and the land?
>> We have ways of
delivering services to remote
non-indigenous Australians
through School of the Air
and all sorts of ways.
So it's a much more complicated
debate than just saying
lifestyle choices.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> People like Patrick, his
uncles Ricky and Frank are
justifiably afraid that their
heritage will be destroyed.
So now they're on a mission
to try and protect them
not only for themselves,
but for everybody.
>> Me and my brother's
ambition is to try start
our organization,
do it ourselves,
protect it with young people,
show them that it's there
for the future so it can
be protected forever.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the Pilbara region,
there's a long history
of Aboriginal people
standing up for their rights.
In the 1940s, it
came together in one
of Australia's first strikes.
Aboriginal people
walked off the stations.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> They all walk off on
the same day, 1946 strike.
>> Those same families
from the 1940's strikes,
they helped start the
Yule River Bush meetings
in the '70s and '80s.
Now more recently,
their children
have come and revived the
Yule River Bush meetings,
bringing everybody
together again
to stand up for our rights.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Them people, 1946 strike,
they couldn't read or write.
But they had brains.
I've never been to university to
tell me to protect my country.
It's my place to
protect my country.
>> In 1972, we brought in
an Aboriginal Heritage Act.
And I want to remind people
what that Aboriginal Heritage
Act was.
It was an act to protect
your heritage, your culture,
your othalu sites, your
standing stones, your carvings.
Well, since that act
was introduced in 1972,
there've been over
100 amendments to it.
And each one of
those amendments has
destroyed the act from its very
core to being the nothingness
that it is now.
>> We as the Aboriginal
traditional landowners reject
the proposed amendments to
the West Australian Aboriginal
Heritage Act.
>> A delegation will again
be sent to Parliament to seek
a meeting with the Minister
for Aboriginal Affairs.
Everybody in favor of it,
please, show of hands.
>> There is a long tradition
of petitioning the government
about why connection to country
is so important to Aboriginal
people.
In 1962, [NON-ENGLISH]
used paintings to declare
their connection to and
ownership of their country.
They created two petitions
using oak and bark,
presenting clan designs of
creatures and places threatened
by mining on their country.
These petitions did pave the way
for land rights in Australia.
In '76, the Northern Territory
Land Rights Act was passed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CAR HORNS BEEPING]
[SIRENS]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Hi, I'm Alf Barker,
Kariyarra elder.
And I'm here with elders
representing Pilbara
this morning.
We've signed the
petition between us
and every community and
organization in the Pilbara.
It's been signed so we
can present it today
here at the government house.
And I hope that the government
will look at it favorably
and realize that their
decision's not always the best
decision for our people.
>> Heritage belonging to
Europeans are protected.
And our heritage is
not being protected.
That's our challenge
to the government.
>> Firstly, I would like to
acknowledge the traditional
people of this land.
>> Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
>> I'm handing you the petition
on behalf of everybody.
>> And I'll take this to the
Parliament as soon as I can.
>> Thank you.
>> Do what we can.
[APPLAUSE]
I assure you, I
share your concerns.
And I know, looking at this
petition that we've been given,
a lot of people worried
about this proposed change.
It's my view that
the change doesn't
give due respect
and consultation
for Aboriginal people.
And the points that I've made
is that Aboriginal heritage
isn't something for
government to bequeath
to Aboriginal people.
It's been there well before
government came along here
in Western Australia.
And we need to look
after and respect.
And importantly,
Aboriginal people
need to be involved in the
process around heritage
recognition and protection.
Good luck with your
meeting with the minister.
And hopefully you can convince
him to make some changes
to that draft bill.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Come in.
Oh.
Hey, [NON-ENGLISH].
>> Hey, [NON-ENGLISH].
[NON-ENGLISH].
>> [NON-ENGLISH].
>> How are you?
[NON-ENGLISH]
>> [NON-ENGLISH] Have
a look at them sites.
>> Yeah, well, have a look here.
>> Down here somewhere.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Yeah.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
The original site.
>> Well, the original
site is not there anymore.
It had been dug up,
made a pit there.
>> How about here?
(READING) Registered
ceremonial man-made structure,
no gender restrictions.
It's file restricted, yes;
location restricted, yes.
So they've got it there.
But they don't give
the exact location.
But you're saying
it's in that area?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> So it's a registered
site that had been--
>> --already done.
>> --half damaged and
a quarter damaged, no?
>> There's a couple of sites
that nearly got graded,
road gone alongside of them.
That's why you've got to act
quick to see the [NON-ENGLISH]..
>> This is one of our sites that
we've been a bit worried about
because it's so close
to the road there.
And I think half of it
already been graded it out.
That's why we want to
work with you guys.
We'd like you guys to
be aware of our sites.
And we're hoping in the
future when you grade it,
it might just be a gap
between this area and the way
you finish off.
- Oh, definitely.
>> We wouldn't stop you guys
from making what you guys want
to develop, fences and roads,
but we just want you guys to be
aware of our sites on country.
>> Yeah, work together
to protect it.
>> Yeah, work together.
This site here belongs
to that sun there.
Our people used to tell
us do not play with it
and destroy it, otherwise
something bad will happen.
Our people tell us you'll
dry out the country.
It'll make it like a desert.
That's why I would like
to work with you guys
and just to prevent damage from
happening to our sites on land.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, it's not hard
to shift the road
10 meters that way to protect
this, not hard at all.
But without this, you
guys coming out here,
I would have never known.
So that's really good that
you guys are coming out here
to show me what
needs taking care of.
>> Because we believe in
a lot of these things.
It's something
non-indigenous Australia
should be proud of too.
Aboriginal people are born
with the responsibility
to look out for it.
And we have to, just like
all the generations before.
>> They all want to know
where these are before I have
to grade the road, then.
>> Mm.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My Auntie Jean, she was born
out on the country underneath
an old paperbark tree.
That tree, still
standing there today.
She's lived here all her life.
She's an elder and a leader.
She understands what connection
to country is all about.
- Yeah, like keeping it.
Look after.
[NON-ENGLISH] Mm.
>> Like the desert mob,
they say, [NON-ENGLISH]..
Like, I'll give you something.
You give me something.
>> Yeah, that's
that [NON-ENGLISH]..
>> Oh, [NON-ENGLISH].
>> [NON-ENGLISH].
>> Oh, yeah.
>> If you look out
for the [NON-ENGLISH],,
the [NON-ENGLISH]
will look after you.
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
>> Mm.
Mm.
>> Just record them--
>> This here?
>> Yeah, the one that you wrote.
Not too much fast and flat-out--
really slow and relaxed.
Like [INAUDIBLE],, when
she tells a story,
you have to lean in
because she builds
the suspense in the story.
>> Oh!
[LAUGHS]
>> But she doesn't
know she's doing it.
But she's doing it because
she gets really quiet.
She talk, and,
yeah, we were going
down the river,
[FADES TO NEAR WHISPER]
and we was coming to the gate.
We was coming to the gate.
>> [CHUCKLES]
>> We're recording.
>> You can stay too.
I will look after you,
if you look after me.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Sometime the old
fellows sit down,
and they wonder to
themselves, when we're gone,
who's going to know
the name of that river,
know the name of that hill?
Learning about your
heritage and culture,
it's every Aboriginal
person's responsibility.
[SINGING ABORIGINAL SONG]
[FIRE CRACKLING]
[RUMBLING]
>> When it gets a little
bit darker in black--
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> --and then the dew come,
that's when all the honey will
be sitting in there.
>> Oh, all right.
>> Very strong, sweet.
>> I personally don't want to be
one of those people who forget
all of that.
I don't want to be one of
those people who don't pass it
on to the next generation.
Going out on country
and visiting country,
maintaining your personal
connection with the country
is important because
without that knowledge,
you lose part of your identity.
I think especially young
people these days, some of them
are a bit lost in their lives.
I fear that's because
they're forgetting
their connection to country.
Living in town and
being silly buggers
and doing all that stuff,
that's not who they really are.
That's not who their parents
are and their grandparents are.
They are people from the bush.
That's what our generation,
my generation and younger,
have missed out on.
It's not all our fault, though.
Government is
stealing our identity
when they destroy our sites.
I love showing Sharliya our
connection to the country.
She needs to know that
there's a big picture.
So I decided to show
her how government
looks after built heritage.
Sharliya?
>> Hm?
>> Come here.
Do you know what that is?
All the sewage go underneath.
That's what it is.
They let the air out from
the sewage, a sewage vent.
Just so all the bad smell
from all the [NON-ENGLISH]
doesn't stink the town up.
Must be important sewage, hm?
Still got more protection
than some of our sites.
>> And this is listed
as a heritage site.
This is listed as
a heritage site.
But all it is, is a air vent
from the old sewage system.
It's street furniture.
But this street furniture,
it got more protection
an Aboriginal heritage site.
- Mm.
How old is this, do you reckon?
>> Well--
>> A couple hundred years?
>> No, from 1910, '11, so just
probably roughly maybe just
around 100 years.
This thing here protected
by state heritage.
And then funnily enough,
it's right here next
to the Department of
Indigenous Affairs.
I wonder if any of
them know what this is.
>> So that kind of heritage
is important to them.
>> But it comes
from a long time.
>> Comes from very long time.
>> Very long time.
It's not as valued
as that one there.
It's got no song.
It's got no value.
But it's the history.
>> Sometimes I feel really
disheartened that built
heritage receives more
protection than Aboriginal
heritage, when a 5,000-year-old
Aboriginal site also tells
the human story.
With built heritage
in Australia,
you can protect a
building sometimes even
against the wishes
of the current owner,
apply for funding to
protect the building,
and have it on a
national register.
As far as I know, when it comes
to Aboriginal heritage sites,
we can't get them
protected automatically.
We can't get funding to
maintain, look after them.
We fight to do that ourselves
through our corporations.
But still, the mining companies
come wanting their own way.
[TRAIN HORN SOUNDING]
>> In Australia, we should
treat our Aboriginal heritage
and our white heritage at
least on the same level,
at least on a par.
But we don't.
We always put forward
our white heritage
as being more important than
our Aboriginal heritage.
>> It's time for one inclusive
Heritage Act that applies
to both indigenous
and built heritage,
or for something new and
powerful to protect Aboriginal
heritage, like what has
occurred in parts of Canada.
>> The Nunavut people have
effectively set up a local
government area where they
do make their own laws.
And they have a power which
is recognized by the broader
sovereign of Canada.
>> After decades of fighting
for self-government,
there was joy today.
[APPLAUSE]
25,000 Inuits, formerly
known as Eskimos,
now have one fifth of
Canada to call their own.
>> We the people of Nunavut have
regained control of our destiny
and will now once again
determine our own path.
[APPLAUSE]
>> The closest that Aboriginal
people have got to that so far
is, pursuant to the
Native Title Act,
they are able to enter
into agreements with mining
companies to effectively
create protocols for protection
of Aboriginal heritage.
So it's a matter of contract
rather than statute law.
We are debating in
Australia at the moment
the question of any kind of
recognition of a First Nations
peoples.
>> All those in favor say aye.
>> Aye.
>> You've got to acknowledge
the importance of Aboriginal
culture.
You've got to acknowledge that
long-term connection to country
before you can have a genuine
relationship with Aboriginal
people.
>> Ben Wyatt is most likely
to be the next Minister
for Aboriginal Affairs.
He's going to be
treasurer as well so he
will have that to meet first.
But I would think
that it won't be long
before he's
commissioning somebody
to draft some better Aboriginal
heritage legislation.
[CHANTING INDISTINCTLY]
>> There are public expressions
of support for Aboriginal
heritage in the
wider population.
People readily embrace cultural
tourism and visual arts.
Despite their interests,
a non-indigenous person
in Australia can live
without an Aboriginal person
in their daily life.
They don't even
need to say hello
to an Aboriginal Australian.
I think that's pretty sad.
>> And I think that's where a
lot of the ignorance and fear
comes from is because we
don't know each other.
>> Wah, wah, wah-ah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [INAUDIBLE] what
you're doing tomorrow.
>> Nothing.
>> Are we on
[INAUDIBLE] tomorrow?
>> [INAUDIBLE].
>> They're going to do some
dancing there afternoon time.
>> What time, 4:00, 3:00?
>> Say 4:00.
>> All right.
>> Try to come in early.
>> Yeah.
>> Like 3 o'clock.
>> Sun down, them
boys can dance, no?
>> No, good.
>> Say 4 o'clock, yeah?
It'll be good.
We'll get some-- have a
little Christmas party, feed
and a dance.
>> All right.
Right.
>> All right, see
you tomorrow, then.
>> Bye.
>> See you.
Just as it's always been,
Aboriginal culture and heritage
is deeply inclusive.
When you come to our
community or something,
you live in it with us
and grow up with us,
you're automatically
our brother,
you're automatically our sister.
That's where the
inclusivity, the respects
come from straight away.
That's the way it's always been.
I think Australia should be
proud of Aboriginal culture
and heritage and embrace
it, be a part of it
so that they can help fight
for it and protect it,
because they will feel it's a
part of their identities well.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[CHILDREN LAUGHING]
>> I hope you understand now
why I wanted to bring you here
to the Pilbara in Northwestern
Australia and listen
to the land, the way we do,
and understand our connection
to country.
I want you to realize how urgent
it is that we work together
to make better
decisions about how
to balance mining and industry
and heritage for the future.
Our kids' future depends on it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) This is my land,
Ngarluma from the rusty ranges
to the big, blue sea.
This is my land, Ngarluma,
[INAUDIBLE],, Murujuga, my land,
my land, Ngarluma.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
This is my land, Ngarluma,
from the rusty ranges
to the big, blue sea.
This is my land, Ngarluma,
[INAUDIBLE] Murujuga, my land,
my land, Ngarluma.
One more time, this is my land,
Ngarluma, from the rusty ranges
to the big, blue sea.
This is my land, Ngarluma,
[INAUDIBLE] Murujuga, my land,
my land Ngarluma!